.. highlight:: text

===================
Chapter 13 -- NULLs
===================

*"The problem isn't what they don't know. It's what they do know that ain't
*so."*

-- Ronald Reagan

Suppose we make a list of US presidents from memory:

+----------------------+---------------+
| **YEAR OF ELECTION** | **NAME**      |
+----------------------+---------------+
| ?                    | Fillmore      |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 1860                 | Lincoln       |
+----------------------+---------------+
| ?                    | Johnson       |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 1880                 | ?             |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 1952                 | Eisenhower    |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 1980                 | Reagan        |
+----------------------+---------------+

We have no idea when Fillmore was elected. We know that somebody was elected in
1880 (Americans hold elections every four years), but we can't remember who. As
for Johnson (the Andrew, not the Lyndon) he wasn't elected; he just took over
for a while after Lincoln's assassination. Now let's "query" this list:

- How many presidents are there? Either 5 or 6 (it depends, maybe the guy
  elected in 1880 was Fillmore).

- Is Lincoln the first president? Probably. The best answer would be "yes".

- Was Eisenhower elected in 1880? Probably not. But suppose he was elected once
- in 1880 and then again in 1952? Our list doesn't tell us.

At this point, you might be thinking that we have a bad "database". But
technically we don't: none of the data is "bad". This is what a bad database
looks like:

+----------------------+---------------+
| **YEAR OF ELECTION** | **NAME**      |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 0000                 | Fillmore      |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 1860                 | Lincoln       |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 9999                 | Johnson       |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 1880                 | (unknown)     |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 1952                 | Eisenhower    |
+----------------------+---------------+
| 1980                 | Reagan        |
+----------------------+---------------+

Here, where we previously had question marks, we've filled in some "default"
values: 0000 means "don't know", 9999 means "not applicable", (unknown) means
"don't know". Now if we query our list, we get some certain answers:

- How many presidents are there? Obviously 6.

- Is Lincoln the first president? No -- Fillmore's date (0000) is less than
  Lincoln's (1860).

- Was Eisenhower elected in 1880? No -- 'Eisenhower' is not equal to
  '(unknown)'.

Now *that's* a bad database. The problem is that our "default" values have no
special significance to our DBMS, so it applied its regular operators and
spewed out definite-looking answers. But it was actually right the first time:
there are no definite answers, and a good DBMS would reflect that.

This example teaches us three things: (*a*) that Ronald Reagan was a sage,
(*b*) that some data can be "unknown" (a data collection failure) or "not
applicable" (a database definition anomaly), and (*c*) that it's better to
admit the deficiencies in a way that the DBMS can account for. This is
unpleasant and mathematically unsound, but it's what we've got.

.. rubric:: Table of Contents

.. contents::
    :local:

Representing Missing Data with NULL
===================================

Those missing values that we represented with question marks in our list are
what SQL calls ``NULL``\s. The ``NULL`` value is an amorphous thing, but it
does have certain properties which we now enumerate.

1. ``NULL`` is a value. Oh, it's true that it *represents* missing data, but
   that doesn't mean that it *is* missing data -- you can put ``NULL`` into
   Columns and you can take it out again. Those operations are only possible
   with values, therefore ``NULL`` is a value.

2. ``NULL`` belongs to a Domain. We know that because all values belong to
   Domains. Therefore, whatever the missing value is in our ``YEAR`` Column, it
   must be an integer -- just like all the other values in that Column. And
   whatever the missing value is in our ``NAME`` Column, it must be a character
   string -- just like all the other values in that Column. We might not know
   what its <data type> is by looking at it, but every ``NULL`` does have a
   <data type> -- and every <data type> has a null value.

3. As we stressed when describing each <data type>, whenever you compare
   ``NULL`` with another value, even another ``NULL``, you cannot say whether
   it is "less than" or "greater than" or "equal to" that other value. There
   are some times, though, when your DBMS might simply ignore ``NULL``\s, or
   pretend that ``NULL`` equals ``NULL``, because in some contexts it won't
   matter.

4. ``NULL`` cannot be represented by a <literal>. Take, for instance, the
   ``SMALLINT`` <data type>. SMALLINT stands for the scale-zero (integral)
   values between -32,767 and +32,767. Can you use any of those values to mean
   ``NULL``? No -- because if you did, you would have a number that is less
   than or greater than or equal to another number in the same set. That is
   what you're trying to avoid.

5. The null value is designated by the keyword ``NULL`` in some SQL contexts.
   Since ``NULL`` is, strictly speaking, a <specification> rather than a
   <literal>, you can use ``NULL`` to denote the null value in SQL statements,
   but you can't use it everywhere that a <literal> is allowed. For example,
   you can't do this:

   ::

      SELECT NULL FROM Widgets;

   because your DBMS wouldn't be able to guess what the <data type>.

The Meaning of NULL
===================

*"The cat is neither alive nor dead."*

-- Erwin Schrödinger

Pay close attention to what these two definitions *don't* say:

- ``NULL``. An SQL keyword. Used for specifying missing (absent) values, for
  any <data type>.

- ``UNKNOWN``. An SQL keyword. One of three values in a truth table (the other
  two are ``TRUE`` and ``FALSE``). A value in a Boolean <data type>.

There is no suggestion that ``NULL`` and ``UNKNOWN`` are synonyms (except as
values for <data type> ``BOOLEAN``). Ordinarily, the two <keyword>s are used in
different contexts, although they have a close association with each other
(because the usual result of comparing something with ``NULL`` is the truth
value ``UNKNOWN``).

Speaking informally, we can say that a value is ``NULL`` "because it's
unknown". But there are several possible reasons for a datum to be missing,
including nuances of unknownness, and including a quite distinct reason:
inapplicability. Different people distinguish different reasons for nullness,
but we believe that all the reasons can be squeezed into two large groups. In
order of importance, they are:

**Group 1 -- the** ``NULL / UNKNOWN`` **group**. The particular reason might be
displayed or explained as "secret", "figure not available", "to be announced",
"impossible to calculate", "partly unknown", "uncertain" or "pending". The
assumption behind all these words is: there is a value, and the entity
possesses the value, but we can't say precisely what the value is right now.

**Group 2 -- the** ``NULL / NOT APPLICABLE`` **group**. The particular reason
might be displayed or explained as "undefined", "moot", "quantum uncertain",
"irrelevant", "none" or "n/a". The assumption behind all these words is: there
is a value, but the entity does not possess the value. Warning: if you have
lots of ``NULL / NOT APPLICABLE`` values, that might signal a flaw in your
database design. Most commonly there is a broken linkage, as in:

::

   Table: Books
      Column: Date_Due

The ``Date_Due`` is properly an attribute of the book's transaction status
(only); therefore for all books which are not out, the ``Date_Due`` has to be
``NULL``.

The distinction between "unknown" and "not applicable" is an old one. Here is
ISO's suggested coding scheme for sex:

+-----+----------------+
| 0 = | UNKNOWN        |
+-----+----------------+
| 1 = | MALE           |
+-----+----------------+
| 2 = | FEMALE         |
+-----+----------------+
| 9 = | NOT APPLICABLE |
+-----+----------------+

So much for what ``NULL`` means: it's a representation of a value that's
missing, either because we don't know it or because it doesn't apply. We can
help this definition along if we delimit things ``NULL`` doesn't mean.

- ``NULL`` doesn't mean NaN (Not a Number). NaN means the value is outside the
  numeric Domain, and we've already shown that ``NULL``\s are in the Domain.
  Therefore, ``NULL`` does not mean Nan, or anything similar such as the result
  of overflow, the result of underflow, a date that's not representable with
  the Gregorian calendar, the square root of -1 ... in short, an illegitimate
  value is not a null value. There is no way to store an illegitimate value,
  but there is a way to store ``NULL``.

- ``NULL`` doesn't mean zero. It's confusing that C manuals say that ``NULL``
  is zero, but there is no reason to worry about that. Back in Al-Khwarezm's
  day, there was much hullaballoo over the number zero -- the objection being
  "how can there be a number which is no number?"

- ``NULL`` doesn't mean '' (empty string). This has often been used in the past
  for "unknown"s -- but we can't let that confuse us.

Three-Valued Logic
==================

Most logical systems rest on two values: is/isn't, yes/no, 0/1, ``TRUE/FALSE``.
SQL's system is more like: true/false/unknown, is/isn't/could-be, yes/no/maybe,
0/1/?, ``TRUE/FALSE/UNKNOWN``. The  ``UNKNOWN`` truth value will generally
result from a comparison that involves a null value. SQL's three-valued logical
system is a departure from the tried-and-true paths of other programming
languages. We will encounter some tricky features and surprises.

The original rule is: any scalar comparison returns the ``UNKNOWN`` truth value
if one of the operands is ``NULL``. The combinatory rules can most easily be
shown with truth tables; see our chapter on the BOOLEAN <data type> if you need
to refresh your memory.

*Predicates*
------------

We've already said that ``NULL`` can't be used with a regular comparison
predicate: ``WHERE X = NULL`` and ``WHERE X <> NULL`` are both illegal SQL
constructs. There's a logical reason for this. The expression ``X = NULL`` has
a ``NULL`` operand, therefore (that's the rule!) the result of the expression
is always ``UNKNOWN``. SQL does, however, support a predicate that will return
``TRUE`` when ``X`` is ``NULL``, and ``FALSE`` when ``X`` is not ``NULL``: this
is the <null predicate>.

<null predicate>
................

The required syntax for a <null predicate> is as follows.

::

    <null predicate> ::=
    expression IS [NOT] NULL

A <null predicate> tests a value to see whether it is ``NULL`` and returns
either ``TRUE`` or ``FALSE``. ``IS NULL`` searches for null values. ``IS NOT
NULL`` searches for non- null values. The predicate's expression argument can
be any expression which evaluates to either a single value or a row.

``IS NULL`` is ``TRUE`` if every value resulting from ``expression`` is
``NULL``. ``IS NOT NULL`` is ``TRUE`` if no value resulting from ``expression``
is ``NULL``. This is straightforward if the expression is a scalar value like a
<Column name>. If there's a null value in the Column, then ``<Column name> IS
NULL`` is ``TRUE`` and ``<Column name> IS NOT NULL`` is ``FALSE``. If the
expression results in a row value, then things are less straightforward.
Certainly, if ``x`` and ``y`` are both NULL then ``(x,y) IS NULL`` is ``TRUE``
and ``(x,y) IS NOT NULL`` is ``FALSE``. And if neither ``x`` nor ``y`` are
``NULL``, then ``(x,y) IS NULL`` is ``FALSE`` and ``(x,y) IS NOT NULL`` is
``TRUE``. So far so good. The surprise is that, if only one of ``x`` and ``y``
is If you want to restrict your code to Core SQL, don't use this expression:
``NULL IS NULL`` or this expression: ``NULL IS NOT NULL``.

Nullability
-----------

There are times when you'll want to ensure that a null value can't be put in a
Column. The obvious case is when it's a primary key: in our example at the
beginning of this chapter, the '?' symbol makes no sense for a ``NAME`` --
first, because then we can't tell how many distinct presidents there are for
sure and second, because then there's no real value for what's supposed to be
the identifying piece of information. To force *non nullability* for a value,
you can use a ``NOT NULL`` Constraint when defining the Object that the value
will be assigned to.

There are some who argue that a ``NOT NULL`` Constraint should be used as a
matter of course. We'd rather think that it's a matter of choice. But anyway,
``NOT NULL`` is a common <Column Constraint>. We'll discuss it in our chapter
on Constraints and Assertions. For now, just keep in mind that all Columns have
a nullability characteristic of either "possibly nullable" or "known not
nullable": it determines (*a*) whether an attempt to ``INSERT`` the null value
into the Column will fail and (*b*) whether a ``SELECT`` from the Column can
ever return the null value. The "possibly nullable" characteristic allows both;
the "known not nullable" characteristic" disallows both.

If you're a programmer, it's useful to know whether a Column is possibly
nullable because that will tell you whether ``NULL`` indicators are needed in
your code. A Column's nullability characteristic is "possibly nullable" unless
one of these situations apply:

1. A Column's nullability characteristic is "known not nullable" if a
   non-deferrable Constraint/Assertion on the Column evaluates to ``Column IS
   NOT NULL`` or if the Column is based on a Domain and a non-deferrable
   Constraint/Assertion on that Domain evaluates to ``VALUE IS NOT NULL``.

2. A Column's nullability characteristic is "known not nullable" if a
   non-deferrable Constraint on the Column is a ``PRIMARY KEY`` Constraint.

The Duplicate Loophole
======================

*"Identification for duplicate removal is at a lower level of detail than
*equality testing in the evaluation of retrieval conditions. Hence it is
*possible to adopt a different rule."*

-- E.F. Codd

Here is a syllogism, based on of some of the things we've said so far:

1. Two values are equal if an equality comparison (=) returns ``TRUE``.

2. If either value is ``NULL``, an equality comparison returns ``UNKNOWN``.

3. Therefore a null value is never equal to a null value.

Well, we've said those things several times and we won't go back on them. But
-- we will introduce a teensy loophole:

4. However, a null value is a duplicate of a null value.

That is, while we'll never say that ``NULL`` equals ``NULL``, we will say that
``NULL`` duplicates ``NULL``. And it goes without saying that, as well, two
values are duplicates if they are equal. There are several operations that this
loophole will affect. Specifically:

``GROUP BY`` -- If you ``GROUP BY column_5`` and every ``column_5`` value is
``NULL``, you end up with only one group.

``DISTINCT`` -- If the values before a ``DISTINCT`` operation are the set
{``7,33,NULL,15,7,NULL``}, then the values afterwards are the set
{``7,33,NULL,15``}.

``UNION`` -- As with ``DISTINCT``, if the values before a ``UNION`` operation
are the set {``7,33,NULL,15,7,NULL``}, then the values afterwards are the set
{``7,33,NULL,15``}.

``EXCEPT`` -- As with ``DISTINCT``, if the values before an ``EXCEPT``
operation are the set {``7,33,NULL,15,7,NULL``}, then the values afterwards are
the set {``7,33,NULL,15``}.

``INTERSECT`` -- As with ``DISTINCT``, if the values before an ``INTERSECT``
operation are the set {``7,33,NULL,15,7,NULL``}, then the values afterwards are
the set {``7,33,NULL,15``}.

Fun with NULLs
==============

There are many operations which are affected by the presence of ``NULL``\s. Our
choice has been to describe the exceptional situation when we describe the
operation. So this is just a quick summary; for full effects read the
appropriate section in another chapter.

*NULL Specification*
--------------------

The ``NULL`` specification can be used, as if it's a <literal, in these
situations only:

- In an ``UPDATE ... SET`` clause, to specify a "value" to assign to a Column,
  i.e., ``UPDATE ... SET ... = NULL``

- In an ``INSERT ... VALUES`` clause, to specify a "value" to assign to a
  Column, i.e., ``INSERT ... VALUES(NULL)``

- To specify a default "value" for a Column or Domain, i.e., ``DEFAULT NULL``

- To specify a ``FOREIGN KEY`` Constraint rule, i.e.: ``ON UPDATE SET NULL, ON
  DELETE SET NULL``

- As a ``CAST`` source, i.e., ``CAST (NULL AS ...)``

- As a ``CASE`` result, i.e., ``CASE ... THEN NULL ... END``, ``CASE ELSE NULL
  END``

- In a row or Table constructor.

*Set Functions*
---------------

``NULL``\s are ignored during most set functions and an appropriate warning is
issued (``null value eliminated``).

*Searches*
----------

``WHERE`` clauses and ``HAVING`` clauses are "satisfied" if the result of the
search condition is ``TRUE``. Since ``WHERE`` rejects both ``UNKNOWN`` and
``FALSE``, the expression ``WHERE column_1 = column_1`` is functionally
equivalent to ``WHERE column_1 IS NOT NULL``.

*Constraints*
-------------

A ``CHECK`` Constraint is "satisfied" (not violated) if the result of the
search condition is either ``TRUE`` or ``UNKNOWN``. Notice the difference here
between "what satisfies a search" and "what satisfies a Constraint".

*Scalar operators and Functions*
--------------------------------

The rule for almost any operator or scalar function is that if a significant
operand is ``NULL``, the result of the whole operation is ``NULL``. For
example, ``5 + [null-value]`` returns ``NULL`` and ``UPPER([null-value])``
returns ``NULL``. Not only that, but a ``NULL`` trumps a zero -- ``[null-value]
/ 0`` returns ``NULL`` (not a division-by-zero error) and ``0 * [null-value]``
returns ``NULL`` (not zero). The only exceptions to this rule are the
``COALESCE`` and ``NULLIF`` functions (see ``CASE`` expression in our chapter
on simple search conditions), which are specifically designed to convert null
values.

*Sorts*
-------

For the ``ORDER BY`` clause, ``NULL``\s are considered to be either higher than
all non-null values, or lower than all non-null values (it's
implementation-defined, so will vary from DBMS to DBMS).

*UNIQUE Predicate*
------------------

``NULL``\s cannot equal anything else, so can't stop ``UNIQUE`` from being
``TRUE``. For example, a series of rows containing {``1,NULL,2,NULL,3``} is
``UNIQUE``. UNIQUE never returns ``UNKNOWN``.

*<reference type>s*
-------------------

If a ``REF`` value involves no site, perhaps because it has been destroyed,
``NULL`` is returned.

*SQL/CLI*
---------

In our chapters on the Call Level Interface, you'll notice that many functions
return blank (or zero) when the situation screams for a ``NULL`` return. You'll
just have to get used to inconsistencies.

Problems For Optimizers
=======================

If you were to write a DBMS optimizer, you'd want to take advantage of certain
*transformation rules*. Usually these rules depend on two-valued logic, for
instance the idea that everything is "either A or not-A". We will give only one
example, which we think is the most famous one.

The Transitivity Rule states: ``IF A = B AND B = C THEN A = C``. Therefore, a
DBMS should detect situations of this nature:

::

   SELECT ...
   FROM   t1,t2
   WHERE  (t1.column1 = t2.column1 AND t2.column2 = 5);

and -- since the join ``(t1.column1 = t2.column1)`` might be expensive --
consider replacing the query with this apparently equivalent (and valid) one:

::

   SELECT ...
   FROM   t1,t2
   WHERE (t1.column1 = 5 AND t2.column2 = 5);

However, if the DBMS encounters the similar-looking SQL statement:

::

   SELECT ...
   FROM   t1,t2
   WHERE (t1.column1 = t2.column1 AND t2.column2 = 5) IS NOT FALSE;

the transform will not be valid. If ``t2.column2`` is ``NULL``, then there will
be a difference between what the original query returns as opposed to what the
"transformed" query would return (``UNKNOWN`` versus ``FALSE``). Therefore a
major optimization becomes too dangerous to try. This is not usually a serious
worry because the usual query involves a ``WHERE`` alone, which means that
UNKNOWNs are filtered out the same way that ``FALSE``\s are. But occasionally
you'll help your optimizer by ensuring that Columns which will be used in
complex queries are always not nullable.

Nulloclasts vs. Nullodules
==========================

If you know any Byzantine history at all, you know about the hundred-year
struggle between the Iconoclasts ("smashers of icons") and the Iconodules
("slaves of icons"). It is disgusting to use a metaphor for that struggle -- by
referring to Nulloclasts ("``NULL`` smashers") and Nullodules ("``NULL``
slaves") - - because ``NULL`` is a Latin word, while clast and dule are Greek
suffixes. It's a good metaphor, though.

*The Nulloclast Position*
-------------------------

The champion on this side is C. J. Date, possibly the best known database
pundit, and author of several books which contain zero howling errors (a
remarkable feat in this field). Here are selected quotes from C.J.Date's *An
Introduction to Database Systems*, sixth edition:

  "... in our opinion, ``NULL``\s -- and the entire theory of three-valued
  logic on which they are based -- are *fundamentally misguided ...*"

  "... it is our general opinion that ``NULL``\s are such a bad idea that it is
  not worth wrecking the whole relational model over them, just because some
  suitable target tuple sometimes does not exist for some particular foreign
  key ..."

  "... ``NULL``\s and [three-valued logic] *undermine* the entire foundation
  of the relational model."

  "... SQL manages to introduce a number of *additional flaws*, over and above
  the flaws that are inherent in three-valued logic per se ..."

  "Our recommendation to DBMS users would thus be to ignore the vendor's
  [three-valued logic] support entirely, and to use a disciplined 'default
  values' scheme instead (thereby staying firmly in two-valued logic)."

(Incidentally, Date -- and sure he is an honourable man -- specifically decries
some of the things we've said here:

- We used the term "null value" -- and an absence of value is not a value.

- We said that nulls are in Domains -- and that leads logical complications:
  all attribute integrity checks would succeed, for instance, because null is
  part of the Domain.)

*The Nullodule Position*
------------------------

The defenders include E.F. Codd, the founder of relational theory. (In fact Mr
Codd favours the idea that there should be more than one ``NULL`` class, and
therefore a four-valued logic.) But we will just quote from Jim Melton, editor
of the SQL Standard:

  "Some notable database personalities have strongly urged the SQL standards
  committee to abandon the notion of ``NULL`` values in favour of default
  values."

But -- summarizing here -- in practice, we don't worry that in the expression
``x = 5``, ``x`` is a "different kind of thing" than ``5`` because we know that
x *represents* an integer value. And by the way, after a series of
back-and-forth persecutions, a few revolts and several thousand deaths -- the
Iconodules won.
